# Introduction {#intro}

## Purpose

This document provides to stakeholders in a National Airspace System (NAS), such as a Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) and its constituents, a point of entry into a set of relevant standards. These standards provide guidance to enable trustworthy Air Domain Awareness (ADA) primarily via cooperative technologies. Such technologies can include, but are not limited to, Unmanned Aircraft (UA) Systems (UAS) Remote Identification (RID), UAS Traffic Management (UTM) and Advanced Air Mobility (AAM). 

This document specifies a concept of operations for interoperable use of DETs as an identity in an international and domestic aviation context. CAAs may adopt this document as-is to become a Means of Compliance (MOC) in their jurisdiction. This document can also be referenced in other documents providing baseline guidance for identity services in an ecosystem.

A CAA MAY mandate through other mechanisms additional requirements beyond this document for UAS interoperability in their jurisdiction.

## Background

Trustworthiness revolves around identification and authentication. {{RFC9374}} defines the Drone Remote Identification Protocol (DRIP) Entity Tag (DET), a trustable identifier backed by asymmetric cryptography. {{RFC9575}} standardizes authentication of DETs and associated information using strong cryptography suited for constrained mobile wireless links (typical of Broadcast RID). Broadcast and Network RID are defined by {{ASTM.F3411}} which designates the  International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) to maintain code-points for Specific Session ID Types and Specific Authentication Methods (SAMs) {{ICAO.RID}}. ICAO includes DETs as a Specific Session ID Type and lists the four DRIP SAMs of {{RFC9575}}.

DETs generated by registrants (typically a UAS Operator or UAS) are merely proposed until they are registered within the hierarchy consisting of at least two levels above the leaf DET: Registered Assigning Authority (RAA) and Hierarchial Host Identity Tag (HHIT) Domain Authority (HDA). The registry system, made up of DRIP Identity Management Entities (DIMEs) acting as either RAAs or HDAs, ensures uniqueness within the hierarchy, endorses inclusion through X.509 certificates, and provides access to public and private information associated with a DET registration. Public information is served using the Domain Name System (DNS) and is specified in {{RFC9886}}. Private information, such as Personally Identifiable Information (PII), is served using the Registration Data Access Protocol (RDAP, {{STD95}}) and protected through policy based differentiated access.

## Scope

Participating entities are assumed in this document to be in compliance with relevant existing UAS standards such as {{ASTM.F3411}}, {{ASTM.F3548}} and {{ICAO.ACCP}}.

This document governs use of a DET in the following cases:

1. An entity that uses a UAS Session ID (some participating entities, e.g. HDAs, may not need UAS Session IDs), MUST use a DET for that UAS Session ID.
2. An entity that participates in DRIP interactions (even if not needing a Session ID), MUST use a DET for the DRIP public authentication key ID in those interactions.
3. An entity that requires a strongly cryptographically verifiable IP compatible identifier, MAY use a DET for any other legal purpose.
4. An entity SHOULD NOT use a DET as a locator in physical or logical space (e.g. as a globally routable IPv6 address outside of an overlay network), as deconflation is intended, see {{RFC9063}}.

The archetypal case is a UAS for which the DET serves as both the UAS ID (first case above) and the Authentication Key ID (second case). Application of this document in a UAS context overlays on the existing {{ASTM.F3586}}, a MOC for UAS RID in compliance with United States (US) CAA regulations, to enable support of the archetypal case in Broadcast RID.

### Targeted DronesQuad Criteria

See {{DsQ.Criteria}} for expanded details.

#### 010: Aerial Complementary Equipment and Services (ACES)

Systems under this criteria will need to interact with others in a secure manner. DETs are a flexible technology that can be leveraged to provide security. This can be as simple as using the DET as a Key ID of some kind in existing protocol exchanges like JOSE or more in-depth implementations lower in the protocol stack.

#### 040: Systems, Safety & Reliability

DETs through the cryptographic properties provide support for system safety.

#### 050: Cybersecurity

The concept of DETs are steeped in cybersecurity. The use of HHITs and the agile nature of its asymmetric key registration and renew allows for the an ecosystem using them to adapt to ever changing requirements. DETs also can enable fine grain control of information with secure identities and encryption.

#### 070: Position, Navigation & Timing

DETs enable the authentication of PNT information for other actors and allow trust to be obtained in other actors information.

#### 080: Signal Monitoring & Transmission (C2 Link)

DETs are a form of HHIT, which are the evolution of the Host Identity Tags (HIT) of the Host Identity Protocol (HIP). HIP provides deconflation of identity and locators in IP-based networks and also has the benefits of multi-homing and mobility in said networks. This is desirable attributes for C2 links of UAS that use a variety of media topologies and those that require frequent hand-offs (such as cellular). 

#### 090: Collision Avoidance - Detect and Avoid (DAA)

When DETs are used as part of systems that are consumed by DAA systems, those systems can perform reliable trust assessment of the information being received. Using DRIP as specified in {{RFC9575}} enables verification of information over Broadcast RID without Internet infrastructure.

#### 200: Flight Data Recording

For this criteria DETs can provide provenance to flight data recordings with the use of signatures or if desired selective encryption/decryption to authorized parties.