# Roles, Responsibilities & Interactions {#roles}

This section outlines the various entity roles in the ecosystem. For each, it summarizes motivations for participating in that DRIP role, as well as the interactions and responsibilities they have in doing so. All entity roles, except as otherwise noted, MUST register a DET with a parent entity in the corresponding parental role (e.g. an HDA must register with an RAA), as per REF.HME.FACES, and MUST use it subsequently in all DRIP interactions requiring an entity ID.

## UAS Observers

An Observer is typically an individual who has a device capable of wirelessly receiving Broadcast RID whether it be an opportunistic passerby with a local-only (i.e. non-Internet connected) smartphone application or a widely deployed sensing system with various IP-based back-hauls. Each has their own motivations for detecting a UAS in their area and querying for additional information. Typically in DRIP, Observers are expected to use DNS (when able) to obtain at least the public keys of unknown DETs and use it to validate signatures found in {{ASTM.F3411}} Authentication Messages. Some Observers may be granted, by cognizant authorities, authorization to perform more detailed queries of further information, that is considered private (as not explicitly classified as public, placed in DNS, and/or transmitted in cleartext in Broadcast RID).

> Author Note:  Broadcast RID here can be dropped or substituted for some phrase comparing Observers to a sensor head, but distinct from a Display-only Observer. If that makes sense and if it is a good distinction to have? One could say Display Applications are in a way Observers (albeit very far removed from the field in most cases where the term is used). Unless we make them their own class of users that could use DETs (and for what?)

All Observers supporting DRIP:

- MUST adhere to relevant details of {{Section 6.4.2 of RFC9575}} with regards to receive processing of DRIP SAMs.
    - Processing of SAMs MAY be deferred or outsourced to a dedicated system.
- RECOMMEND display all DETs following {{RFC5952}} or as described in {{hid-abbrev}}.

> Author Note: as justification for "processing MAY be deferred": Intention here was to allow for Observers not needing to fully process data if desired and push said processing to SDSPs. An example is a slim Finder concept that does no parsing of RID data, just extraction out of transport framing.

Observers authorized by cognizant authorities to access any private (in addition to all public) information recorded as part of the registration process also:

- MUST support RDAP authentication/authorization mechanisms of REF.HME.FACES and others allowed by the cognizant authority.
- MUST register to authentication systems as required by the cognizant authority.
    - A DIME MAY be used as part of an authentication system.

## UAS Operators

UAS Operators is used herein as a catch-all term for several more specific UAS related roles: Remote Pilot, Pilot In Command (PIC), party (typically an organization) to whom or which the UAS is registered with the cognizant CAA, etc. DRIP does not attempt to clarify the definition of Operator to match any specific CAA, instead using the ambiguity to group these roles based on their similar DRIP interactions.

A UAS Operator's desire to use DETs can be any number of the following operational factors:

- Confidentiality of flights through Session IDs.
- Privacy of Remote Pilots by encrypting their Ground Control Station (GCS) position.
    - This option may be constrained by their jurisdiction's RID regulations.
- Reputation of their UAS based on observation and reports of behavior supported by Authentication.

To participate a UAS Operator SHOULD use a DET, registered either with an RAA or HDA, as part of any interactions in DRIP, such as registering a UAS Session ID for their UA. A UAS Operator MAY use another cryptographic scheme for interactions but it MUST be asymmetric with their public key accessible to all domain participants via a standardized method for the cryptographic purpose of signature verification.

## UAS Manufacturers

While UAS Manufactures do not have a direct requirement for DRIP, they typically wish to maintain good reputation of their brands and are often driven by market forces. Such forces include requirements and preferences of both UAS Observers and Operators.

This document assumes a UAS Manufacturer is already in compliance with {{ASTM.F3411}}. Thus those that wish to support DRIP also:

- MUST provide a mechanism, typically through a GCS, to generate and register a DET for use as either a Session ID, Authentication Key ID or both.
    - MUST bind DET to both UAS Serial Number and Operator. Binding MAY be indirect if system can verify Serial Number already registered to Operator.
    - SHOULD be issued in a manner that keeps private key ONLY ever on UA, does not expose it to GCS etc., but MAY be done in manner that exposes it to GCS or Operator if necessary.
    - SHOULD allow user selection of a parent DIME (typically HDA) using a URI, Hierarchy ID (HID) value, or both
    - MAY support registering multiple DETs in a batch transaction
- SHOULD provide a mechanism to enable, during registration, subsequent encryption of selected fields (e.g. pilot/GCS location), only if the CAA allows it.
- MUST follow {{Section 6 of RFC9575}} as it relates to transmission of SAMs, when using DET as an Authentication Key ID
- MUST, in the {{ASTM.F3411}} Basic ID Message, set the UAS ID Type to Specific Session ID, Specific Session ID Type to DRIP Entity ID, and encode the DET in network byte order, when using DET as a UAS Session ID
- MAY use a DET, following {{Section 4.2 of RFC9374}}, as a UAS Serial Number
    - It is expected that the UAS Manufacturer runs their own HDA, under which these DETs are registered

## HDA Operators

In the UTM context, it is expected that the HDA function will be provided by a UAS Service Supplier (USS) to its clients (e.g. UAS Operators). This can be in-house or out-sourced to a service bureau more specialized in cryptographically verifiable identifiers usable to access data and systems on networks. Outside the UTM context, an HDA can be a stand-alone provider to any registrant desiring a DET, or more generally HHIT.

Being associated with a USS has some operational benefits:

- Ease for UAS Operators to use both Session IDs and UTM together
- Binding between the DET and Operational Intent
    - Enables safer use of encryption
    - Ability to keep DET private until just before an operation goes active

An HDA Operator:

- MUST register, with its parent RAA, one or more DETs, and use it or them in DRIP interactions
- MUST implement interfaces and functions described in REF.HME.IFACES
- MUST maintain DET registrations with relevant PII as required by their jurisdiction
- MUST fulfill the requirements of their jurisdiction
- SHOULD NOT provide to clients the ability to enable encryption of data elements considered PII, especially in Broadcast RID

As part of a USS an HDA Operator also:

- MAY provide encryption ID services, if allowed by jurisdiction
- MAY have its registration interfaces (REF.HME.IFACES) be integrated into relevant USS interfaces and functions
- SHOULD defer the publishing of a client DET in DNS when it is bound with an Operational Intent until it is "active"
    - Methods to sync an Operational Intent in a USS state and DET state in HDA are out of scope for this document

## RAA Operators

In the context of this document, RAA Operators are typically CAAs or other cognizant authorities of a Nation State. Each Nation State is allocated four RAA values that are used at their discretion. To obtain these allocations, a Nation State contacts the Apex operator for the UAS or other applicable hierarchy, currently IANA on behalf of ICAO, requesting their provisioning providing any details required by the Apex Operator to configure domain delegations.

Each RAA has the responsibility to delegate HDAs under them. Allocation methods of HDA values are at the discretion of the RAA Operator and their policies. Any requirements to operate under an RAA, beyond those as defined in this document to operate as an HDA, are out of scope for this document.

An RAA Operator:

- MUST obtain an RAA value(s) from the Apex Operator and provide content for NS RRType(s), see {{caa-ic}}
- MUST register, with its parent (if any), one or more DETs, and use it or them in DRIP interactions
- MUST implement interfaces and functions described in REF.HME.IFACES
- MUST maintain DET registrations with relevant PII as required by their jurisdiction
- MUST provide requirements for prospective HDA Operators, and SHOULD do so publicly via an easily located web site
- MUST ensure HDA Operator compliance with this specification

> Author Note: subsection or appendix on a potential RAA scheme for CAA? i.e. 1x MIL, 1x GOV, 1x COMMERCIAL, 1x SPARE with some example guidance on HDA allocation?

## Apex Operators

The Apex role is the administration root and the domain apex for a specific IPv6 prefix which are typically associated with an industry sector (i.e. DETs being for aviation). This translates to the technical tasking of delegating RAA values and maintaining the reverse DNS zone associated with the allocated IPv6 prefix which contain the DNS delegations to RAAs. An Apex in its capacity as the administration root MAY endorse the required RAA delegation in the hierarchy.

Currently IANA performs the functions of RAA delegation (with no endorsement) and DNS zone maintenance for the DET prefix. This is largely a custodial task as critical portions of the RAA range, with regards to aviation, are already reserved or allocated with the rest of the range unassigned.

In the context of aviation pre-allocated RAAs to CAAs are currently expected to mutually cross-certify as specified in {{ICAO.ACCP}}.