# Privacy & Transparency Considerations {#ptc}

The considerations discussed in {{RFC9153}} and {{Section 10 of RFC9434}} apply.

> Author Note: do we copy/paste Section 10 of {{RFC9434}} and update here or is below sufficient?

## DETs as Session ID and Authentication Key ID {#det-ptc}

The properties of a DET allow it to be used as a Session ID and/or an Authentication Key ID. There may be scenarios in which Session IDs are desired for privacy but Authentication is not; although this may reduce transparency and security, a DET may be used exclusively as a Session ID in such. There are scenarios in which Authentication is desired but Session IDs are not (e.g. where a CAA does not allow Session IDs); a DET may be used exclusively as an Authentication Key ID in such. In the scenario expected to be most common, both Session IDs and Authentication are desired; the same DET should be used as both the Session ID and Authentication Key ID in such.

## Selective Encryption

> Author Note: renamed section and/or add more explicit disclaimer?

Selective encryption may be allowed in some circumstances. An observed DET may be used in a private lookup to access decryption key material or obtain decryption as a service.

Selective encryption of UAS RID using DRIP is only allowed when the DET to be used as the Session ID is issued by an HDA associated with a USS and that DET is associated with the corresponding Operational Intent in UTM. This enables the encryption of selected data elements in Broadcast RID to provide a layer of privacy for operators (e.g. their position) without compromising transparency to entities (e.g. public safety / law enforcement personnel) that need to know.

Selective encryption typically requires network connectivity of the Observer to perform the private query to obtain the decryption service or key material. CAAs should consider the expected Observer environment and prohibit encryption wherever and whenever Observers cannot reasonably be expected to have connectivity. For example selective encryption, per CAA regulations, may be allowed in dense wireless IP connectivity areas (e.g. urban) but prohibited in poor wirelessly covered areas (e.g. rural).
